CRYOSPHERE • The chalky-scaled coccolithophores,
which are made of calcium carbonate,
(Melting Sea Ice)
are very reflective and often gives the
Phytoplankton are influenced by Earth's water a bright, turquoise glow.
cryosphere. As global temperatures rise and • Sea water changes from blue to green
sea ice melts, it impacts these organisms. as the abundance of phytoplankton in
Phytoplankton thrive in the ocean's surface the water increases.
(top) layer, relying on sunlight for growth. With • Land is represented by dark Gray colour
less ice, more sunlight penetrates the water, while light Gray colour represents ice,
promoting their growth. polar darkness or clouds.
These observations, coming grom the
CYCLING OF ENERGY &
Moderate Resolution Imaging
MATTER Spectroradiometer (MODIS) on NASA’s Aqua
satellite, provide insights into the ocean's
The patterns of distribution of phytoplankton
health and its role in the global carbon cycle.
that we spot are related to both physical and
Satellite data, combined with ocean samples,
biological processes. NASA scientists have
help scientists understand phytoplankton
observed that rising sea surface temperatures
distribution and carbon absorption in the
lead to a global decline in phytoplankton
productivity. This is because warmer waters world's oceans.
reduce vertical mixing between nutrient-rich
deep (denser) waters and surface (less dense) IMPACTS OF BLOOMS
waters, where phytoplankton grow. As surface
water warms, layering increases, further limiting Phytoplankton are crucial for marine
nutrient transfer, which in turn decreases ecosystems, but excessive nutrient pollution can
phytoplankton growth. Conversely, cooler trigger harmful phytoplankton blooms.
temperatures promote better mixing and higher
These dense blooms block sunlight, harming
productivity.
submerged aquatic vegetation (SAV) and
disrupting fish nurseries.
MEASURING
PHYTOPLANKTON As dead phytoplankton decompose, they
deplete oxygen, creating "Dead Zones" where
marine life suffocates.
The ocean, covering 70% of Earth, is home to
vast amounts of microscopic life, particularly
`Some phytoplankton species also produce
phytoplankton, which far outnumber larger
biotoxins, leading to harmful algal blooms
marine organisms. Phytoplankton blooms, rich
(HABs), which can kill marine life, cause
in chlorophyll and pigments, change ocean
irritation, and make seafood dangerous to eat.
colours visible from space, allowing satellites to
track their abundance.
Over the past 30 years, NASA satellites have
monitored ocean colour changes, using
chlorophyll levels to estimate phytoplankton
concentrations. For example,
• The water may turn greenish, reddish or
brownish due to presence of chlorophyll.