ocean from the land. This runoff may phytoplankton are eaten by other creatures,
carry fertilizers and other nutrients which themselves reproduce, generate waste
applied to agricultural fields, providing and die.
phytoplankton the nutrients needed to
thrive and bloom.
• Dust can contain soluble iron, which is
an essential nutrient for phytoplankton
growth and development.
Other factors, like water temperature and
salinity, water depth, wind and what kind of
predators are grazing, also influence
phytoplankton growth.
INTERACTION WTH OTHER
SPHERES There are trillions of phytoplankton in the sea
which together convert huge quantities of
BIOSPHERE carbon dioxide into living matter. In that
process, they release a major percentage of
Phytoplankton, responsible for nearly half of the the world’s oxygen into the atmosphere.
planet’s primary production, covert carbon
Scientists estimate that at least 50 percent of
dioxide, sunlight and nutrients into organic
the oxygen in our atmosphere has been
matter.
produced by phytoplankton.
They are the foundation of the aquatic food
They are also responsible for drawing down
web, the primary producers, which means the
significant portions of CO from the air. This
2
entire marine food chain depends on the
allows the oceans to absorb additional CO
2
supply of phytoplankton. If the plankton
form the atmosphere. A decline in
disappear, the chain is broken and eventually,
phytoplankton populations would result in
the animals will suffer.
higher levels of CO2 in the atmosphere.
They are such important sources of food for
Therefore, even small changes in the growth of
many marine animals that waters rich in
phytoplankton may effect atmospheric CO
2
phytoplankton usually support a thriving,
concentrations, which would feed back to
diverse marine ecosystem.
global surface temperature.
ATMOSPHERE
GEOSPHERE
(Oxygen Production)
(Short and Long term Carbon Cycle)
During photosynthesis, phytoplankton capture
Phytoplankton, responsible for around 50% of
and store solar energy, where they remove
Earth's photosynthesis, play a key role in
carbon dioxide from seawater and release
regulating atmospheric carbon, with over 99.9%
oxygen as a by-product.
of carbon dioxide incorporated into living
Some of the carbon dioxide is carried to the things over time buried in marine sediments.
depth ocean floor when a phytoplankton die.
Coccolithophores, a type of phytoplankton,
The carbon is soon covered by other material
contribute to this process by storing carbon in
sinking to the ocean bottom while some is
their scales, which can sink to the ocean floor
transferred to different layers of the ocean as
and become a long-term carbon sink.