PHYTOPLANKTON
Phytoplankton are tiny plants and algae that When conditions are right, phytoplankton
live throughout the global ocean in the upper population can grow explosively, a
sunlit layer. They serve as the base of the phenomenon known as bloom.
marine food web and produce oxygen vital to
Blooms in the ocean may cover hundreds of
life. When there are large amount of
square kilometres and are easily visible in
phytoplankton in the ocean, they change the
satellite images.
colour of the water. The colour we see depends
on the type of phytoplankton suspended in the A bloom may last several weeks, but the life
water. span of any individual phytoplankton is rarely
more than a few days.
By monitoring global phytoplankton
communities and abundance with
SURVIVAL OF
unprecedented detail using PACE , which
carries NASA’s most advanced colour sensor, PHYTOPLANKTON
we get a better understanding of the complex
systems that drive ocean ecology and the
Phytoplankton growth depends on the
health.
availability of sunlight, CO and nutrients like
2
nitrate, phosphate, silicate and calcium at
INTRODUCTION various levels depending on the species. Due to
this reason, they live in the surface waters of the
ocean.
The word ‘phytoplankton’ is derived from the
Greek words Phyto (plant) and plankton (made
All phytoplankton photosynthesize, but some
to wander or drift).
get additional energy by consuming other
organisms. Whenever the supply of surface
• These are microscopic organisms that
waters diminishes due to the photosynthesis
live in watery environments, bot salty
process, it is replenished from the atmosphere
and fresh.
above.
• Most phytoplankton are single-celled
plants while some are bacteria or protists
The major limiting factor regulating
(simple eukaryotic organisms that are
phytoplankton growth is the availability of
neither plants nor animals or fungi).
nutrients. This is the reason of more abundance
• Among the common kinds are
of phytoplankton in some areas of the ocean
cyanobacteria(photosynthesizing
compared to others. Nutrients can also be
bacteria), silica-encased diatoms (plant-
supplied by following sources:
like), dinoflagellates, green algae and
chalk-coated coccolithophores. • Since most nutrients are found in colder
depth of the ocean, whenever those
water are bought near the surface,
upwelling, the oceans are essentially
fertilized and the plankton bloom.
• High chlorophyll concentrations line the
coasts where nutrients wash into the